The Akbarnama explains the life of the Mughal emperor Akbar, with particular detail given to the battles and victories of the celebrated emperor. The Akbarnama is accompanied by various illustrations.
This painting illustrates the siege of Ranthanbhor, a fort located near Agra and built upon a steep, rocky hill.
The fortress is surrounded by a high wall, “hence they say that all other forts are naked, while this is mail-clad.”
This fort is strategically important to Akbar’s conquest of the Rajputs; the Rajputs were a warrior community that held power over a region of India.
Ranthanbhor is held by Rai Surjan Hada, and is reputed to be the strongest fortress in the area.
The fortress had been attacked before in a failed mission, so now Akbar has taken the defeat of Ranthanbhor into his own hands.
The lower right of the illustration shows Akbar’s army, firing guns and cannons from the bottom of the hill up into Ranthanbhor.
“The ocean-like army surrounded it […] They were active in firing cannon, and the thunderbolt of wrath built up the life-harvest of the ill-fated enemy.”
The militia are sheltered by high stone walls, built by command of Akbar; this demonstrates superior military strategy, as his army could approach the fort in relative safety.
The guns are aligned along the walls, illustrating how organized and focused Akbar’s troops are.
The fort burns from the cannon fire; men reach out for help from a man riding an elephant
Elephants were prized possessions in Mughal India, and had immense ceremonial and propagandistic standing.
They were often decorated with bells and sometimes even painted; this elephant is adorned with a large bell around its neck, and decorated with smaller bells along its front and sides.
Elephants were trained to stand strong and still, even amidst artillery fire, as a symbol of strength, wealth, and military power.
The presence of an elephant in Ranthanbhor illustrates the importance of the fort to Akbar’s efforts of conquest.
Unlike the prized elephants of military successes, this elephant is shown in motion, turned away from the incessant fire of cannons,
half-reared on its hind legs, seeming to flee from the site of attack.
This upset stoicism of the elephant suggests panic among Surjan’s troops, foreshadowing the eventual defeat of the fort.
From atop the elephant’s back, a high-ranking general —
perhaps even Rai Surjan himself, judging by his gold armour —
views not only the Rajput troops, but also Akbar’s troops below. He has his back turned
to the barrage of guns from the opposing army, and allows his elephant to flee, signalling his own realization that Ranthanbhor’s defeat is inevitable.
As the siege and the barrage of cannon fire continues, Ranthanbhor begins to show signs of defeat.
In the background, a piece of the building falls into the courtyard. Smoke billows from the fires, while men leap closer to safety.
The army of Ranthanbhor is in a state of chaos, some soldiers running for cover, some surveying the troops below.
Men fall from the fort, tumbling down the rocky hill, some covered in blood.
Below, Akbar’s troops are organized; the gunmen are all aligned; soldiers charge ahead ith spears and shields; and still farther below more army men and nobles are gathered under tents.
This insinuates the inferiority of Surjan’s troops, and the superiority of Akbar’s troops.
Indeed, the details and composition of the painting solidifies Akbar’s military prowess.